Ananya Burman & Syd Davis

HI 534: Theory and Practice of Digital History

Dr. Ryan Carty

April 28, 2026

# White Paper: *UNRAVEL* & “PSYOPtics”

## Introduction 

The Digital Age has brought about undeniable progression in how we engage with history, politics, and philosophy. There has been an expansion in communication, access to knowledge, and newfound realms of reality that have arisen rapidly. Yet right alongside, we find ourselves at the center of information overload, lack of clarity, and general confusion about how to navigate the spaces that we now depend on. Especially in a time of great political strife, the possibility of war, and the country-wide loss of presence, most of the public, especially the working-age population, seek to clarify and navigate these overwhelming spheres of knowledge. Now, mediums of education have been one of the most expensive results of the digital sphere, and with them comes great responsibility. Most of the American population has noticed that the majority of news is readily accessed through social media, even the government communicates with Americans through “X” more than cable-televised announcements, and for the majority of schools, a computer is the chief textbook. 

To aid in navigating the political complications of today, we have created a public broadcasting network, called UNRAVEL, to host an array of accessible scholarly knowledge in the form of video essays, a popular form of intimate scholarship that provides all of the qualities of a written essay, with the advantage of direct engagement with the authors. Accompanying the new relational element, we provide an array of interactive visualizations of our knowledge through digital collections and other cutting-edge data graphics. We seek to minimize ambiguity in the web of knowledge through direct access to discussion, transparency, and acknowledgement. 




## Our Project

As post-modern digital humanists, interaction with digital academic social media concepts (e.g., Are.na, Notion, and Sublime), and watching video essays as a form of education has become essential in the modern academic sphere. We set out to develop an academic space for users to interact with video content without the over-saturation, the hassle of ads, or the fear of misinformation that accompanies social media. We theorized and mapped out the project for months before developing the site, detailing methods of combining our knowledge in Public History and Post-Modern Metaphysics. 

We proposed, designed, and built a public broadcasting network, called UNRAVEL, to host an array of accessible scholarly knowledge in the form of video essays, a popular form of intimate scholarship that provides all of the qualities of a written essay, with the advantage of direct engagement with the authors. Accompanying the new relational element, we provide an array of interactive visualizations of our knowledge through digital collections and other cutting-edge data graphics. The purpose of the site is to minimize ambiguity in the web of knowledge through direct access to discussion, transparency, and acknowledgement. This is an important part of our work, as we aim to imbue our audience with new learning perspectives and access to resources that move the needle towards historical and theoretical perspectives that are often exclusively explored in higher education and research. 

The broadcast itself is a flexible, yet polished static site that allows viewers to engage with and discuss the topics at hand with ample access to the data in discussion within each episode. The idea is that each episode may have unique digital medium attached to it; in the case of “PSYOPtics,” a curated digital collection of artifacts and documents about various domestic psychological operations, some being directly released government documents entailing operations, others including civilian media related to said operations or the public imagination which has been shaped by them, i.e. newspaper articles, social media posts, or generally propagandized media. 

Our network is shaped by a series of intentions, entailed by our ‘Social Manifesto,’ created and located in its own tab of the network website, available for all users. The manifesto is made up of four principles that guide all media deployed on the site. 

Here are the tenets:
1. Strive for Transparency & Accessibility

2. Continually look for the gaps & silences in the scholarship we share

3. Welcome discourse between the user and the collection

4. Promote positionality in knowledge production 

The objective behind creating a manifesto was a bid for complete transparency of our goals. We attempted to make our intentions clear to our viewers, allowing the audience autonomy to make an informed decision about the knowledge that they engage with. Poetics and narrative play a tremendous role in the production of historical knowledge, and acknowledging the nature of truly nuanced scholarship is invaluable to expanding the public imagination. As Hayden White encompasses in “The Historical Text as Literary Artifact” in Geoffrey Roberts ed., The History and Narrative Reader, “We may only know the actual through contrast with, or likening to, the imaginable.”

  The direct intention of UNRAVEL is to provide a space for people to engage with research and scholarship in a way that allows for more intimate interaction with the material. We aim for clarity, support, and innovation for each of our viewers. After engaging with the network, we hope for viewers to come away feeling like they not only have a greater understanding of the topic and access to resources, but to feel inclined to discussion, to breakthroughs, to widen the web that each topic has opened. We intend for our viewers to gain a better understanding of modern topics while understanding their place in the topic, our place in facilitating knowledge, and the topic’s place in their own lives. Understanding that bias runs rampant and being able to notice it, work with it, and minimize it are essential to UNRAVEL. We hope for the network to be one of many spaces for expansive engagement, a model for what accessible, interesting, and reliable modern knowledge can look like. 

  As this phase of the project comes to an end, what we have ultimately created is a public broadcast network in the form of a static site that hosts our first episode (the script at the moment,) an accompanied digital collection housing the majority of the artifacts that we plan to include, our broadcast manifesto, our team page, and two separate interactive sections that allow for users to communicate with us and with each other, respectively. We are still in the process of putting the final touches on certain features of the site, i.e., details with the discussion board, formatting for implementing further episodes, and the final edited version of the video essay. The network itself is already a user-friendly space for our audience to navigate through and engage with our scholarship, us, and one another amply.            

Our video essay, coupled with a digital collection, which will be used as an interactive, curated primary-source bibliography for our video essay. Unlike a traditional bibliography, which often does not involve strict copyright rules, our use of primary documents in a collection space requires us to follow the copyright laws of the archives we are using. The government documents necessary for our collection come from the FBI ‘Vault’ archive, and are free from copyright policy under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), which makes these declassified documents public domain. However, our use of civilian documents, like newspapers, is sourced from Ancestry.com’s Newspaper archive, which does require the permission of the site to be used in a collection. The site writes, “To obtain permission to use any of these copyrighted elements, which permission may be granted or refused in our sole discretion, please write to copyright@ancestry.com with a full description of the element that you desire to use and the purpose, place, and extent of use intended. We may permit or deny any requests at our sole discretion.” Currently, we have not received confirmation of our copyright status, and have refrained from embedding any newspaper scans that may put the site at risk. In the future, if our request is denied, we will still cite and reference them in our collection, but not include the full newspaper scan. 

## Digital Tools & Methods 

The Network, a static site generated through Jekyll and hosted through GitHub, lives as an accessible interactive space for our audience to engage with material and actively participate in facilitating the knowledge that we discuss in each episode. There are numerous features to the site that allow for users to engage with the content in an expansive way. We have a direct-contact feature on the homepage that viewers can use to privately message us with thoughts, questions, ideas that they would like to see discussed. Along with that, on the episodes page, underneath each video, we will have a discussion “Nexus,” essentially a discussion board where users can comment on the post or create threads to communicate with other viewers and discuss the posts, expanding their knowledge and perspectives. This feature, created through a backend STATICFORMS, which does not require users to have accounts on our site, nor Github accounts, and only includes spam-protection; all other security necessities i.e. protection from hate speech, will have to be done manually by us.

The Episode itself is being recorded with equipment rented through the NC State University Library, posted to YouTube and embedded directly onto the webpage. We will have automated transcripts through YouTube’s transcribing tool. As for the collection, the data that we address is available to users through our digital collection built through CollectionBuilder, a static open-source framework that allows the deployment of a collection built through Github to a more polished interactive digital collection. The collection itself is embedded directly into our side, under the “DIGITAL COLLECTIONS” page for users to navigate the information centrally to our network. 

Our digital collections live on their own page on the site, and will be reciprocally linked to their respective episode. Although each collection will technically be its own site, they are embedded directly into the site on the ‘Digital Collections’ page, allowing users to centrally access all of the relevant resources on our site. Similarly, each of the video essays are currently planned to be hosted through YouTube, with automated transcripts and embedded directly into our site. They will dually be housed on an UNRAVEL Youtube channel, which allows for a larger audience to access the content and find our website through the description of each video, as well as our bio. In the future, we hope to expand past the need for YouTube engagement and host our videos solely through our broadcast.

## Findings, Insights, and Arguments
UNRAVEL’s first episode, and the introduction to our network, is called “PSYOPtics,” which centers a video essay and digital collection on the developing relationship between domestic Psychological Operations in the United States and the American public imagination. This episode uses the history of COINTELPRO, a domestic Cold War psychological program formed by the FBI to target American political extremist organizations, to better understand how political life and American reality at large have been impacted by politically motivated psychological warfare. The Counter-Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO) existed covertly from 1956 and 1971 when it was discovered by a congressional committee. This historical moment was then compared to modern notions of PSYOP, which are thought to be disseminated through digital media sites to reassert a dominant capitalistic understanding of reality. The episode defines these two moments of PSYOP and American imagination as “Cold War PSYOP” and “Digital Age PSYOP,” with our digital-age research covering roughly 2010 to the present. These moments in time are assessed for their impact on reality, as well as their political, philosophical, and historical implications, answering the following questions:
- How have domestic CIA Psychological Operations impacted not just the shared memory of American citizens, but American reality at large? 
- How has PSYOP evolved through time following the digital revolution? 
- How has this evolution worked to enforce or reinforce Cold War narratives? 

The entirety of UNRAVEL takes on an adventurous mission rather than a fixed historical goal meant to be argued. Instead, our website prioritizes a digital humanities philosophy that we share with viewers, garnering discussion between the site and the user. However, like any typical essay, our video essay episode includes an academic question and thesis statement, which is used to kickstart the discussion between us cohosts.  

The primary “PSYOPtics” thesis, following our research question, is most clearly stated within our video essay script. The thesis being: As the status quo has evolved through the age of neo-liberalism, so have the requirements of PSYOP. In the digital age, global privatization, and free-market ideals, PSYOP is no longer exerted through an ideological war, but rather through manufacturing desire. Surveillance data and social media algorithms target American consumers, manipulating perceptions and behavior to drive consumption. Americans, rather than ideologically supporting capitalism, have become unaware of it completely. 
 
 The video essay format has allowed us to display how the American status quo has evolved. Video essays, a newly popular form of scholarship, provided us with more intimacy and engagement with our content and audience. The direct portrayal of us as authors, along with a more expansive access to dialogue on the content, provided us a useful method for delivering our information. For “PSYOPtics,” one of the largest discussion topics is how public imagination is sculpted, primarily through misinformation and ambiguity. Throughout our mission, information transparency takes a central role, and ambiguity is leveled largely through the interactive, conversational, and recognition-oriented medium of video essay. The accessibility of a video essay provides much more room for engagement with the authors, the topic, and clarity through visualizations of our research on domestic psychological operations in America. Through the Network, the audience has ample opportunity to participate in the conversation, and through a video essay format, they have our research provided to them firsthand, with discussions of the content included. 

Our Digital Collection, which displays the Cold War primary sources used to visualize our main thesis, allows viewers to address the direct documents that drive our academic questions. However, as we chose our COINTELPRO data by hand, sifting through dozens of the COINTELPRO documents, we leave gaps in the research that will require further contextualization in the future. As this project progresses outside of the current course parameters, we may expand our Digital Collecting to include a larger dataset using OpenRefine, in order to display our thesis more effectively.

## Historiography

We applied the larger philosophies of Digital History to develop our site. These, namely being digital hermeneutics, which we used to approach our site in both a technological dimension, and as a cultural phenomenon. Frédéric Clavert and Andres Fickers discuss in “On Pyramids, Prisms, and Scalable Reading” that making transparent the digital production of historical knowledge results in emphasizing this production as a “complex process of human-machine interaction.” This co-constructs historical inquiry and investigation, allowing both the audience and developers to engage more thoughtfully with digital history projects.  It's a realm for users to learn from our research and also from each other, and have direct access to our sources to engage with. Our website applies the current theoretical methods employed by the digital humanities field and attempts to expand them to market to a less research-focused audience. 

To provide viewers with quality information, we examined the historiography of the field mostly closely associated with the topics discussed in episode 1. For this, we primarily assessed the study of American Intelligence, understanding how we could curate a project both significant to the field and accessible to our intended audience. The history of American Intelligence as a branch of study has evolved through several decades. Around the 1970s, the number of scholars researching and referencing American Intelligence skyrocketed following the release of some intelligence records, as well as the disarray of Nixon scandals like Watergate (Ferris, 87). Richard Bett’s 1975 piece Soldiers, Statesmen, and Cold War Crisis can be described as the ideal of the field during the time. American Intelligence studies often incorporated political science and history methods to analyze this history. Ferris describes in “Coming in from the Cold War” that these techniques would come specifically from existing paradigms in military history and strategic studies (Ferris 89). Through the evolution of the field, a major understanding of this work emerged. This was the understanding that the records would always be strategically released, weak, full of gaps, and thus would be the fate of the writing. Ferris writes, “The existing body of work is politicized, written to shape a private and /or public debate about the intelligence community. There is nothing wrong with that fact– as long as it is recognized” (Ferris 92) This aspect of the American intelligence historiography is one we address, adding to the field through our site’s transparency and attention to gaps. This is the primary reason why our work is significant within the field. Not only do we use philosophical paradigms to analyze the history of COINTELPRO, applying a media studies perspective to the conversation, but we also acknowledge gaps and silences as a pillar of academic inquiry throughout our website.

## Process 

The initial idea for the project arose as an idea for a video essay-series which would entail discussion and scholarship on various topics relevant to our fields of study, which the ultimate construction of the networks and series combines our knowledge in Public History and Post-Modern Metaphysics. Through our own personal engagement with digital spaces that harboured unique and modern scholarship, we wanted to create an academic space for users to interact with video content, without over-saturation, the hassle of advertising, or the fear of misinformation that often accompanies social media. We took HI 534: Theory and Practice of Digital History, where we learned about the various methods of digital history and the digital humanities at large. We came to newfound understandings of the practice of digital ethics, how features and modes of communication, data accessibility, and display have a larger effect on the realms of knowledge that the public engages with. The digital sphere is a realm of reality in and of itself, which we better understand now as something to be facilitated with great responsibility. Syd often discussed the long-standing idea of creating a unique broadcast for academic content, and we began conceptualizing the components of a larger project that could host the video essays. 

With the notions of digital ethics, we understood immediately that there were countless features and aspects to the project that we hoped to include in our idea. We immediately created our manifesto and ideated on how to implement ideas of transparency, accessibility, and positionality in practice. It was immediately clear that users' capacities to communicate directly with us, and discuss with each other, would be essential to the success of this method of education. We wanted our audience to be able to engage with credible knowledge, have the opportunity to find the gaps, discuss with others who share an interest in our content, and navigate our sources in an accessible manner. That was the point where the public broadcasting network came to life; we realized that we could build a static webpage through guidance from workshops in class. I (Ananya) chose to opt for coding through Jekyll in order to build a static site, and knew that there was great potential and benefit for a broadcast in the form of a static site. 

After watching other video essays, we noticed a larger ambiguity in bibliographies, coupled with a disinterest from viewers in parsing those that involved a larger bibliography. We wanted to create a balanced, interactive mode of access to important data that lay cleanly between credible and approachable. Through the various options at hand for data visualization, we felt that our quality-based data for “PSYOPtics” would be best showcased through a digital collection, which would provide both the interactive element, along with direct access to sources talked about in the essay. The content of our first episode added an extra layer to the importance of information transparency. Opening the door for general users to engage directly with relevant documents that took us hours to dig for adds another facet to the accessibility of our literature. 

In regard to “PSYOPtics,” we have long been interested in the topic of government disinformation operations, and capitalist sculpting of the American psyche in our modern day. Through our endeavor to create our first video-essay, we saw that it was the perfect opportunity to hone in on our questions in relation to PSYOP in the US. We became really interested in memetics, and modern PSYOP as casual digital surveillance becomes intrinsic to our society. We understood that that the contrasts between government documents, 20th-century media and 21st-century civilian media would prove to be undeniably important to discuss and provide access to together. 

As we continued the process of building the network, more ideas arose in relation to features that we would like users to have access to, i.e. design and organizational elements. Working closely with Dr. Ryan Carty, our professor in Digital History, we coded the site by hand and launched it through Github. We often used sites like Reddit and Quora, along with Github's informational repositories in order to learn from other users’ experiences with coding and designing a static site by hand. A large intention of ours was to have clarity, simplicity, and accessibility in regard to our webpage itself. 

Digital ethics are a large part of the discourse surrounding knowledge facilitation in the age of Artificial Intelligence. We refused to generate a site through AI, although easy, it would completely forgo the importance of our mission in creating a transparent, ethical, and personal mode of knowledge facilitation. As we endeavored on hand-coding a website, some AI usage was involved, as minimally as possible, we used CoPilot in our intense cases of website corruption due to coding errors. AI was helpful in algorithmically tracing where the errors were, explaining them, and assisting in the fix. We have continuously used the least amount of artificial intelligence possible, for sustainability and ethics reasons, maintaining transparency about and AI involvement has been essential to our process, whenever we have used it in order to troubleshoot tricky code mistakes and accompanied corruptions. 

Throughout the process, we made sure to keep an account of which portions of the project were completed by whom. There were multiple written and ideological aspects of the project that were worked on by both of us, yet we did our best to keep record of which portions were directly built by either of us. At the very beginning, we knew that Syd’s career in Public History and mine (Ananya) in Metaphysics made it clear that the already working categories of our project, “Cold-War” and “Digital-Age” would be primarily managed by one of us respectively. Syd collected all of the primary and secondary source data for the “Cold War” section, along with creating the historiography for it, while I went ahead and collected the data for the “Digital-Age” section and began coding the website. We wrote our proposal equally, with each section that we completed labeled individually. 

As the process continued, we realized that I (Ananya) had a strong interest in building and coding the site and Syd had a strong interest in the historical elements of the project, so I coded the site, and they built the historiography; we both still took help from one another in terms of discussion and design. As I took care of coding the collection along with embedding it into our site, Syd, with great interest in curatorial studies, took care of curating our digital collection, adding labels, and collecting the metadata components that I was building the collection files through. Syd began drafting our script and main points of discussion for the episode as I moved forward with creating our pages in the site, coding the features of the site, design elements, and implementing Github programs like STATICFORMS and CollectionBuilder. Syd completed the outline for the script and we have been working together on the final script. They led with significant work on the script outline and I came in to add on portions of the “Digital-Age” theory and further discussion. For the technical aspect of our video essay, I am acquiring our equipment and recording the video, while Syd is taking the lead on editing it. 

Some areas of the project as a whole are still in the works and are being built by us ongoingly. The first being the commenting section, where users can currently use the feature, yet we are still working on the nesting capacities so that the discussion board can have its organized threads. We are also working to record our video essay and embed it into the website, especially with the added layer of YouTube, the process requires extra time and delicacy. Lastly, we are still working with CollectionBuilder’s requirements for displaying the actual images of our documents, which are absolutely possible, but one of the most complicated and delicate portions of coding through Github’s CollectionBuilder. 

The Broadcast and episode have come a long way since we began our process, with most of our intended constructions having come to life. We now stand with a functional public broadcasting network, which can receive messages from users, host videos, digital collections, and more. We will be continuously working on the site, and hopefully use it for various projects in the future, implementing it into our careers in the humanities! Ultimately, we succeeded in the cultivation of both UNRAVEL and its first episode, “PSYOPtics.” We both look forward to continuing our projects, developing the site into new phases, and hopefully cultivating a community of users who gain from engagement with our network!

OUR BROADCAST NETWORK: https://theunravelproject.github.io/ 
OUR GITHUB: https://github.com/theunravelproject/theunravelproject.github.io 










## BIBLIOGRAPHY:

Ancestry, “Copyright Policy,” https://www.ancestnotry.com/c/legal/copyright-policy Accessed: March 10, 2026

FERRIS, JOHN. “Coming in from the Cold War: The Historiography of American Intelligence, 1945–1990.” Diplomatic History 19, no. 1 (1995): 87–115. http://www.jstor.org/stable/24912440.

Hayden White, “The Historical Text as Literary Artifact,” in Geoffrey Roberts (ed.), The History and Narrative Reader (Routledge: New York and London, 2001), pp. 221–36, cf. pp. Xi–xii.

Leonard, Aaron J., and EBSCOhost. Menace of our Time: The Long War Against American Communism. Rutgers University Press, 2025.

Onder, Sevsu. , "Theorizing Psychological Operations through Norm Entrepreneurship: The Cases of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty," Uluslararasi Iliskiler / International Relations 22, no. 86 (2025): 67-86.

Scott-Smith, Giles. , "Confronting Peaceful Co-Existence: Psychological Warfare and the Role of Interdoc, 1963-72," Cold War History 7, no. 1 (2007): 19-43.

Tobin, K. 2002. “The Reduction of Urban Vulnerability: Revisiting 1950s American Suburbanization as Civil Defence.” Cold War History 2 (2): 1–32. doi:10.1080/713999949.

Tolle, Yeshua G. B. , "Friendship in the Time of COINTELPRO: Clarence Major and Dingane Joe Goncalves," Melus 47, no. 3 (2023): 153-170.
